# METHYLMERCURY-INDUCED-DNA-METHYLATION-FROM-EPIDEMIOLOGICAL-OBSERVATIONS-TO-EXPERIMENTAL-EVIDENCE

This repository contains raw and processed qPCR data linked to the paper "METHYLMERCURY-INDUCED-DNA-METHYLATION-FROM-EPIDEMIOLOGICAL-OBSERVATIONS-TO-EXPERIMENTAL-EVIDENCE" (doi....)

Sample collection:

SH-SY5Y cells were cultured in accordance with an established protocol (Attoff et al., 2016), routinely checked for mycoplasma contamination and used between passages 60-65. Cells were maintained in Minimum Essential Media containing 10 % FBS, 1 % Non-Essential Amino Acids, 2 mM L-glutamine, and 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin (all reagents from Life Technologies). Cell cultures were sub-cultivated once every week, cells were seeded at a density of 27000 cells/cm2 in 75 cm2 cell culture flasks, and kept in an incubator at 37 °C and 5 % of CO2. For the experiments, SH-SY5Y cells were seeded in 60 mm x 15 mm dishes at a density of 12500 cells/cm2. One day after seeding, the routine culture medium was removed and replaced with differentiation medium composed of DMEM:F12 supplemented with 100 IU/mL penicillin and 100 µg/mL streptomycin , 2 mM L-glutamine, 1 % N2 supplements and 1 µM retinoic acid (Merck), dissolved in ethanol (final concentration 0.1 %). The exposure to MeHg took place over 6 days while the cells were differentiating. For this, the exposure was started the first day of differentiation and 50 % of the differentiation medium was replaced with fresh differentiation medium containing 1X MeHg 3 days later.
At the end of the differentiation and exposure, the media from the SH-SY5Y cells was removed and the cells were washed once with PBS (Gibco/Life technologies). To detach the cells, 1 mL of TrypLE (Gibco/Life technologies) were added to each well and left to incubate for 5 min at room temperature. The cells were then re-suspended in 2 mL of routine culture media, transferred to 15 mL tubes and centrifuged for 5 min at 300 g. The supernatant was then removed and the cells were kept at -80 ⁰C until the RNA and DNA extraction was carried out.

For extraction of RNA and DNA, the AllPrep DNA/RNA Mini Kit (Qiagen) was used following the manufacturer’s instructions. The concentrations of the extracted RNA and DNA were quantified with a plate reader (Tecan Spark, Zürich, Switzerland) or with a Nanophotometer P-class (IMPLEN GmbH), and the samples were stored at -80°C until further processing.

Extracted RNA was diluted to a concentration of 1000 ng in 20 µL RNase free water, and cDNA was synthetized with iScript Synthesis Kit (BioRad), following the manufacturer’s instructions. Upon cDNA synthesis, the samples were diluted in 60 µL of RNAse free water and stored at -20°C until processing. The quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) was performed using 4 µL of cDNA (4 ng), 5 µL SsoAdv supermix (BioRad), primers, and RNase free water. Amplification was carried out with a CFX384 Touch Real-Time PCR Detection System (Bio-Rad, Hercules, California) using a program of 95°C for 2 min; 95°C, 5 s and 60°C, 30 s with 40 cycles and melt curve analysis at 65-95°C for 5 s. The primers were purchased as PrimePCR assays from Bio-Rad and the assay information is provided in the supplementary material (supplementary table S1). Data were analyzed with the CFX Maestro software (Bio-Rad, version 1.1), the CT values of SH-SY5Y samples were normalized against 3 reference genes (RPL19, TBP, and POLR2B). The relative gene expression was calculated using the 2ˆ –delta delta CT (2^-ΔΔCT) method (Livak and Schmittgen, 2001), and the analyzed data are presented as Log2-fold change in expression of each gene at different MeHg concentrations.

Files:

1. qPCR_METHYLMERCURY-INDUCED DNA METHYLATION – FROM EPIDEMIOLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS TO EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE.xlsx is a file containing raw CT values and fold change values 

